Rewrite of the configuration reference guide (#16496)
quarkusio/quarkus: docs/src/main/asciidoc/config-mappings.adoc

////
This guide is maintained in the main Quarkus repository
and pull requests should be submitted there:
https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/tree/main/docs/src/main/asciidoc
////

> = Config Mappings

Author: What about "Mapping configuration to objects"

    OptionalInt optionalInt();
}
----

==== Collections Config Mapping

[source,java]
----
public interface CollectionTypes {
    @WithName("strings")
    List<String> listStrings();

    @WithName("ints")
    List<Integer> listInts();
}

public interface Maps {
    @WithParentName
    Map<String, Server> server();

    Map<String, String> anotherServer();
}

public interface ServerCollections {
    List<Environment> environments();

    interface Environment {
        String name();

        List<App> apps();

        interface App {
            String name();

            List<String> services();

            Optional<List<String>> databases();
        }
    }
}
----

==== Defaults Config Mapping

[source,java]
----
public interface Defaults {
    @WithDefault("foo")
    String foo();

    @WithDefault("bar")
    String bar();
}
----

==== Converter Config Mapping

[source,java]
----
public interface Converters {
    @WithConverter(FooBarConverter.class)
    String foo();
}

public static class FooBarConverter implements Converter<String> {
    @Override
    public String convert(final String value) {
        return "bar";
    }
}
----

[[config-properties]]

> == [.line-through]#@ConfigProperties# (Deprecated)

Author: If it's deprecated, I would just remove it from the documentation and add a line in the migration guide.

Reviewer: Well, I was thinking that these should go through a deprecation cycle. This feature is somehow popular and a lot of people use it, so I'm unsure about removing them completely from the documentation, considering that we don't even have versions docs at the moment. My plan, was to just remove it when we remove the code API as well.

What did we do with other cases?

Author: If it's the first time it's deprecated, yes. I would even be more clear and add:

```
IMPORTANT: This feature will be removed soon, please update your code base
```

Reviewer: Sure.

////
This guide is maintained in the main Quarkus repository
and pull requests should be submitted there:
https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/tree/main/docs/src/main/asciidoc
////
= Mapping Configuration to Objects

include::./attributes.adoc[]

:numbered:
:sectnums:
:sectnumlevels: 4
:toc:

With Config Mappings it is possible to group multiple configuration properties in a single interface that
share the same prefix.

[[config-mappings]]
== @ConfigMapping

A Config Mapping requires an interface with minimal metadata configuration and annotated with the
`@io.smallrye.config.ConfigMapping` annotation.

[source,java]
----
@ConfigMapping(prefix = "server")
interface Server {
    String host();

    int port();
}
----

> The `Server` interface is able to map configurations with the name `server.host` into the `Server.host()` method and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `Server` interface is able to map configuration properties with the name `server.host` into the `Server.host()` method and
```

> `server.port` into `Server.port()` method. The configuration property name to lookup is built from the prefix, and the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`server.port` into `Server.port()` method. The configuration property name to look up is built from the prefix, and the
```

method name with `.` (dot) as the separator.

=== Retrieval

To retrieve the Config Mapping, a simple `@Inject` of the Config Mapping interface is enough:

[source,java]
----
@Inject
Server server;

static void businessMethod() {
    String host = server.host();
}
----

In non-CDI contexts, use the API `io.smallrye.config.SmallRyeConfig#getConfigMapping` to retrieve the Config Mapping
instance:

[source,java]
----
SmallRyeConfig config = ConfigProvider.getConfig().unwrap(SmallRyeConfig.class);
Server server = config.getConfigMapping(Server.class);
----

=== Features

> The ConfigMapping supports the following set of features:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Config Mapping supports the following set of features:
```
(that's how you call it elsewhere)

- Automatic conversion of the configuration type.
- Nested Config Mapping groups.
- Validate if configuration properties exist at the startup.
- Support for `Map`, `List`, `Set`, `Optional` and primitive types.

Additionally, the annotations `@WithName`, `@WithParentName`, `@WithDefault`, `@WithConverter` may be used to override

> the default behaviours of ConfigxMapping interfaces.

Reviewer 2: Is the `x` in `ConfigxMapping` normal?

}
----

==== Collections Config Mapping

[source,java]
----
public interface CollectionTypes {
    @WithName("strings")
    List<String> listStrings();

    @WithName("ints")
    List<Integer> listInts();
}

public interface Maps {
    @WithParentName
    Map<String, Server> server();

    Map<String, String> anotherServer();
}

public interface ServerCollections {
    List<Environment> environments();

    interface Environment {
        String name();

        List<App> apps();

        interface App {
            String name();

            List<String> services();

            Optional<List<String>> databases();
        }
    }
}
----

==== Defaults Config Mapping

[source,java]
----
public interface Defaults {
    @WithDefault("foo")
    String foo();

    @WithDefault("bar")
    String bar();
}
----

==== Converter Config Mapping

[source,java]
----
public interface Converters {
    @WithConverter(FooBarConverter.class)
    String foo();
}

public static class FooBarConverter implements Converter<String> {
    @Override
    public String convert(final String value) {
        return "bar";
    }
}
----

[[config-properties]]
== [.line-through]#@ConfigProperties# (Deprecated)

> IMPORTANT: This feature will be removed soon, please update your code base and use @ConfigMapping instead.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
IMPORTANT: This feature will be removed soon, please update your code base and use `@ConfigMapping` instead.
```

> As an alternative to injecting multiple related configuration values is to use the

Reviewer 2: `As an alternative to... is` sounds weird, I would have either expected `An alternative` or a second part to this sentence.

public interface GreetingConfiguration {

    @ConfigProperty(name = "message") <1>
    String message();

    @ConfigProperty(defaultValue = "!")
    String getSuffix(); <2>

    Optional<String> getName(); <3>
}
----
<1> The `@ConfigProperty` annotation is needed because the name of the configuration property that the method
corresponds does not follow the getter method naming conventions.
<2> In this case since `name` is not set, the corresponding property will be `greeting.suffix`.
<3> It is unnecessary to specify the `@ConfigProperty` annotation because the method name follows the getter method
naming conventions (`greeting.name` being the corresponding property) and no default value is required.

When using `@ConfigProperties` on a class or an interface, if the value of one of its fields is not provided, the
application startup will fail, and a `javax.enterprise.inject.spi.DeploymentException` will be thrown. This does not
apply to `Optional` fields and fields with a default value.

=== Additional notes on @ConfigProperties

When using a regular class annotated with `@ConfigProperties` the class doesn't necessarily have to declare getters and

> setters.Having simple public non-final fields is valid as well.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
setters. Having simple public non-final fields is valid as well.
```

Furthermore, the configuration classes support nested object configuration. Suppose there was a need to have an extra
layer of greeting configuration named `content` that would contain a few fields:

[source,java]
----
@ConfigProperties(prefix = "greeting")
public class GreetingConfiguration {

    public String message;
    public String suffix = "!";
    public Optional<String> name;
    public ContentConfig content; <1>

    public static class ContentConfig {
        public Integer prizeAmount;
        public List<String> recipients;
    }
}
----
<1> The name of the field (not the class name) will determine the name of the properties that are bound to the object.

Setting the properties would occur in the normal manner:

.application.properties
[source,properties]
----
greeting.message = hello
greeting.name = quarkus
greeting.content.prize-amount=10
greeting.content.recipients=Jane,John
----

> Furthermore, classes annotated with `@ConfigProperties` can be annotated with Bean Validation annotations:

Reviewer 2: I'm a bit surprised that you describe far more features for the deprecated way of doing things?

Reviewer: Sure. Let me add some more detail.
